Project Gutenberg's Two Latin Plays for High-School Students, by Susan Paxson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Two Latin Plays for High-School Students

Author: Susan Paxson

Release Date: April 5, 2010 [EBook #31894]

Language: Latin

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWO LATIN PLAYS ***




Produced by Louise Hope, David Starner, Chuck Greif and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





[This text is intended for users whose text readers cannot use the
"real" (Unicode/UTF-8) version of the file. All macrons ("long" marks)
have been changed to circumflex accents; y with macron (rare) is shown
as ý. The "true" circumflex does not occur. Curly quotes and apostrophes
have been changed to their simpler "typewriter" form.]




  TWO LATIN PLAYS FOR
  HIGH-SCHOOL STUDENTS


  By

  SUSAN PAXSON

  Instructor in Latin in the Omaha High School


  GINN AND COMPANY
  Boston · New York · Chicago · London
  Atlanta · Dallas · Columbus · San Francisco




  Copyright, 1911, by Susan Paxson
  All Rights Reserved
  522.10


  The Athenæum Press

  Ginn and Company · Proprietors
  · Boston · U.S.A.




  _CUI BONO?_


  _If this little entertainment shall give pleasure and
  be of profit to any who have set out on their
  toilsome journey into the realm of Latin
  Literature, the writer's aim will
  be accomplished_




PREFATORY NOTE


I am greatly indebted to Mrs. C. H. Beeson and to Professor Frank J.
Miller, of the University of Chicago. To the former, for her most
scholarly and generous assistance in the correcting of the manuscript
and for her many valuable suggestions throughout the work; to the
latter, for his painstaking reading of the proof and for his kindly and
helpful interest. In fact, it was largely due to the helpful uplift that
came to some of my advanced classes, as well as to myself, from the
presentation of Professor Miller's "Dramatizations from Vergil" that
these little plays were written.

  SUSAN PAXSON




CONTENTS


                                    Page

  INTRODUCTION                        ix

  A ROMAN SCHOOL                       1

      COSTUMES                        16

  A ROMAN WEDDING                     19

      COSTUMES AND SUGGESTIONS        37




INTRODUCTION


In response to the invitation of the author and publishers, I am glad to
stand godfather to this little book of original Latin plays. They are
the product of an enthusiastic teacher coöperating with students whom
she has, in part by this means, inspired with a genuine interest in
Roman life and its expression in the Latin tongue. They offer a helpful
contribution to the solution of the ever-present and vexing problem
which teachers of Latin in secondary schools are meeting: How can we
make this Latin _interesting_ to our pupils? How can we compete with
departments which more easily hold the pupils' interest because their
subject matter touches more nearly the various phases of modern life?
It is, indeed, true that any subject well taught by a live teacher will
interest pupils. But, even where this condition is realized, the need
is being felt more and more of something which will vary the deadly
monotony incident to the learning of the technique of a language,
especially one which makes its appeal largely to the eye alone through
the medium of the printed page.

It is one of the most encouraging features of our present-day classical
work that teachers more and more are inventing ways of vitalizing their
teaching without weakening it. For this must always be borne in mind:
that we are not seeking to gain mere _interest_. What we want is
interest in _Latin_. We want our students to be so interested that they
will cheerfully endure all the hardships incident to this study because
they have discovered that it is worth while in itself, because it has
come to mean something to them, because it actually touches their own
lives.

If the reader will scan the department of "Current Events" in the
present volume of the _Classical Journal_, he will find many indications
of this new spirit among classical teachers in the schools. Thus we find
a Latin club in a high school in Columbus, Ohio, giving, among other
activities, an exhibition of a Roman _triclinium_, in which the whole
scene was enacted as nearly as possible in the Roman fashion,
accompanied by Latin songs. And thus the pupils were made to realize
that the Roman's life was not entirely one of warfare, but that he ate,
drank, and acted as a real human being. In Kansas, a classical club was
recently organized by the students of Hiawatha Academy, whose program
consists of talks on classical subjects and Latin songs, followed by a
social hour enlivened by Latin games. In Lincoln, Nebraska, a live Latin
club has originated in an exceptionally strong Cæsar class. They call
themselves the _Legio Decima_, because they scorn "anything that has to
do with cavalry"! Their program abounds in live topics connected with
the Latin work and unique representations of Roman life.

But the greatest success seems to have been gained through the dramatic
presentation of matter pertinent to the students' work. We read of a
spirited entertainment by the students of a Seattle high school, in
which were given scenes from the "Menaechmi" of Plautus, together with
the singing of several odes of Horace which had been set to appropriate
music. Others have attempted a play of Terence. Scores of schools have
presented dramatized scenes from Vergil; and we read of a school in
Georgia where Horace's ninth satire, itself a complete little drama as
it stands, was played by the students. In the same school portions of
Cæsar were dramatized and acted; and a dramatization based on the
conspiracy of Catiline was recently sent to me from a school in Indiana.

From all these and many other points it is reported that great interest
is aroused among the students, primarily in the fact and production of
the play itself, but resulting also in a permanent interest in the more
serious and regular work of the Latin class. The author of the plays
presented in this book has herself already reaped rich rewards of her
work in the continued zeal of her students for their Latin study after
they have passed on to college. She writes that the boy who played
"Cicero" in the wedding last year is now a freshman in an eastern
college, and still finds Latin the work of his greatest interest and
success; and the girl who was "Tullia" in the play is also a freshman in
college, with zeal and courage enough to attempt the composition of
Latin hymns.

The difficulty heretofore felt by teachers and their Latin clubs has
been in finding appropriate plays in Latin simple enough for their
pupils to master without undue hardship, and appealing strongly in their
subject matter to the young student; and I feel sure that in these two
plays, "A Roman School" and "A Roman Wedding," will be found just the
material which has been sought. Aside from the awakened interest of the
student and the vivid impression which his mind will receive of these
two important phases of Roman life, who can estimate the actual gain in
the acquisition of the Latin language itself, which will come not alone
to those students who are fortunate enough to take part in these plays,
but to those as well who listen to the rehearsals and to the final
production?

I therefore most cordially commend these plays to all teachers of Latin,
and urge that they be presented in the schools each year wherever
possible.

  FRANK JUSTUS MILLER
  The University of Chicago




A ROMAN SCHOOL

90 B.C.




  DRÂMATIS PERSÔNAE

  Magister
  Servî
  Paedagôgus
  Aulus Licinius Archiâs   } _iûdicês_
  Pûblius Licinius Crassus }
  Gâius Licinius Crassus, _adulêscêns_

  _Discipulî_

    Mârcus Tullius Cicerô
    Quîntus Tullius Cicerô
    Lûcius Sergius Catilîna
    Mârcus Antônius
    Gâius Iûlius Caesar
    Appius Claudius Caecus
    Gnaeus Pompêius
    Pûblius Clôdius Pulcher
    Mârcus Iûnius Brûtus
    Quîntus Hortênsius Hortalus
    Lûcius Licinius Lûcullus
    Gâius Claudius Mârcellus
    Mârcus Claudius Mârcellus




A ROMAN SCHOOL


  When the curtain is drawn, plain wooden benches are seen arranged in
  order on the stage. Two boys stand at the blackboard, playing "odd
  or even"; two others are noisily playing _nuces_[1]; one is playing
  with a top, another is rolling a hoop, and a third is drawing a
  little toy cart. Three boys in the foreground are playing ball. They
  are Quintus Cicero, Marcus Cicero, and Marcus Antonius. With their
  conversation the scene begins.

    [Footnote 1: "Four or five of these (walnuts) are piled
    pyramidally together, when the players, withdrawing to a short
    distance, pitch another walnut at them, and he who succeeds in
    striking and dispersing the heap wins." Story, "Roba di Roma,"
    p. 128.]

_Q. Cic._ Mihi pilam dâ!

_M. Cic._ Ô, dâ locum meliôribus!

_M. Ant._ Tû, Mârce, pilam nôn rêctê remittis. Oportet altius iacere.

_M. Cic._ Iam satis alta erit. Hanc excipe!

  (Tosses the ball very high.)

_M. Mar._ (going up to L. Lucullus who has the cart). Mihi
plôstellum dâ.

_L. Luc._ Nôn, hôc plôstellum est meum. Sî tû plôstellum cupis, domum
reversus inde pete.

_M. Mar._ Mihi tû nôn grâtus es, Lûcî Lûculle.

  (The _Magister_ enters and loudly calls the roll, those present
  answering _adsum_.)

_Mag._  Mârcus Tullius Cicerô.
        Quîntus Tullius Cicerô.
        Lûcius Sergius Catilîna.

  (Catilina is absent and all shout _abest_.)

        Mârcus Antônius.
        Gâius Claudius Mârcellus.
        Gâius Iûlius Caesar.
        Appius Claudius Caecus.

  (Appius is absent and all again shout _abest_.)

        Lûcius Licinius Lûcullus.
        Gnaeus Pompêius.
        Pûblius Clôdius Pulcher.
        Mârcus Iûnius Brûtus.
        Quîntus Hortênsius Hortalus.
        Mârcus Claudius Mârcellus.

Nunc, puerî, percipite, quaesô, dîligenter, quae dîcam, et ea penitus
animîs vestrîs mentibusque mandâte. Sine morâ respondête. (Writes on the
board the sentence "Omnîs rês dî regunt.") Nômen _dî_, Mârce Cicerô,
dêscrîbe.

_M. Cic._ Dî est nômen, est dêclînâtiônis secundae, generis masculînî,
numerî plûrâlis, câsûs nôminâtîvî, ex rêgulâ prîmâ, quae dîcit: Nômen
quod subiectum verbî est, in câsû nôminâtîvô pônitur.

_Mag._ Bene, Mârce, bene! Ôlim eris tû mâgnus vir, eris cônsul, eris
ôrâtor clârissimus, quod tam dîligêns es. Quînte Cicerô! (Enter Catilina
late. He is accompanied by a _paedagogus_ carrying a bag with
_tabellae_.) Ô puer piger, homô perditissimus eris. Quô usque tandem
abûtêre, Catilîna, patientiâ nostrâ? Vâpulâbis.

_L. Cat._ Ô magister, mihi parce, frûgî erô, frûgî erô.

_Mag._ Catilîna, môre et exemplô populî Rômânî, tibi nûllô modô parcere
possum. Accêdite, servî! (Enter two _servi_, one of whom takes Catilina
by the head, the other by the feet, while the _magister_ pretends to
flog him severely, and then resumes the lesson.[2]) Pergite, puerî.
Quînte Cicerô, verbum _regunt_ dêscrîbe.

    [Footnote 2: See Johnston, "Private Life of the Romans," p. 81;
    or Miller, "The Story of a Roman Boy."]

_Q. Cic._ (hesitatingly). _Regunt_ est verbum. Est coniugâtiônis
secundae, coniugâtiônis secundae, coniugâtiônis se . . .

_Mag._ Male, Quînte. Tû es minus dîligêns frâtre tuô Mârcô. Nescîs
quantum mê hûius negôtî taedeat. Sî pênsum crâs nôn cônfêceris, est mihi
in animô ad tuum patrem scrîbere. Haec nîl iocor. Tuam nêquitiam nôn
diûtius feram, nôn patiar, nôn sinam.

_Q. Cic._ Ô dî immortâlês, tâlem âvertite câsum et servâte piôs puerôs,
quamquam pigrî sunt.

_Mag._ Quînte Hortênsî, verbum _regunt_ dêscrîbe.

_Q. Hor._ _Regunt_ est verbum; praesêns est _regô_; înfînîtîvus,
_regere_; perfectum, _rêxî_; supînum, _rêctum_. Est coniugâtiônis
tertiae, generis actîvî, modî indicâtîvî.

_Mag._ Rêctê, rêctê, Quînte! Bonus puer es. Gnaeî Pompêî, perge.

_Gn. Pom._ (crying). Nôn pergere possum.

_Mag._ Ô puer parve, pergere potes. Hanc placentam accipe. Iam perge.

_Gn. Pom._ (taking the little cake and eating it). _Regunt_ temporis
praesentis est; persônae tertiae; numerî plûrâlis nômen sequêns, ex
rêgulâ secundâ, quae dîcit: Verbum persônam numerumque nôminis sequitur.

_Mag._ Rêctê! Nônne tibi dîxî tê rem expônere posse? Nihil agis, Gnaeî
Pompêî, nihil môlîris, nihil côgitâs, quod nôn ego nôn modo audiam, sed
etiam videam plânêque sentiam. Gâî Mârcelle, tempus futûrum flecte.

_G. Mar._ _Regam_, _regês_, _reget_, _regêmus_, _regêtis_, _regent_.

_Mag._ Quae pars ôrâtiônis est _omnîs_, Gâî?

_G. Mar._ _Omnîs_ est adiectîvum.

_Mag._ Rêctê; estne _omnîs_ dêclînâbile an indêclînâbile, Pûblî Pulcher?

_P. Pul._ _Omnîs_ est dêclînâbile, _omnis_, _omne_.

_Mag._ In quô câsû est _omnîs_, Mârce Brûte?

_M. Bru._ _Omnîs_ est câsûs accûsâtîvî ex rêgulâ quae dîcit: Nômen
adiectîvum câsum et genus nôminis substantîvî sequitur.

_Mag._ Cûius dêclînâtiônis est _omnîs_, Mârce Mârcelle?

_M. Mar._ _Omnîs_ est dêclînâtiônis tertiae.

_Mag._ Potesne omnîs dêclînâre?

_M. Mar._ Oppidô, magister, auscultâ. (Declines _omnis_.)

_Mag._ Mârcus Claudius, suô môre, optimê fêcit. Quam cônstrûctiônem
habet _rês_, Mârce Brûte?

_M. Bru._ _Rês_ est nômen câsûs accûsâtîvî, quod obiectum verbî _regunt_
est. (Enter Appius Caecus late. His _paedagogus_ accompanies him.)

_Paed._ Magister, Appius Claudius hodiê mâne aeger est, idcircô tardê
venit. (Exit.)

_Mag._ Poenâs dâ, "Micâ, Micâ," recitâ.

_App. Caec._  Micâ, micâ, parva stella,
              Mîror quaenam sîs, tam bella!
              Splendêns êminus in illô
              Alba velut gemma caelô.

              Quandô fervêns Sôl discessit,
              Nec calôre prâta pâscit,
              Mox ostendis lûmen pûrum
              Micâns, micâns per obscûrum.

_Mag._ Quis alius recitâre potest?

_All_ (shouting). Ego possum, ego possum.

_Mag._ Bene; Mârce Antônî, recitâ.

_M. Ant._     Três philosophî dê Tusculô
              Mare nâvigârunt vâsculô;
              Sî vâs fuisset tûtius
              Tibi canerem diûtius.

_Others_ (shouting). Mihi recitâre liceat.

_Mag._ Recitâ, Gnaeî Pompêî.

_Gn. Pom._    Iôannês, Ioannês, tîbîcine nâtus,
              Fûgit perniciter porcum fûrâtus.
              Sed porcus vorâtus, Iôannês dêlâtus,
              Et plôrâns per viâs it fûr, flagellâtus.

_M. Bru._ (holding up his hand). Novum carmen ego possum recitâre.

_Mag._ Et tû, Brûte! Perge!

_M. Bru._     Gâius cum Gâiâ in montem
              Veniunt ad hauriendum fontem;
              Gâius prôlâpsus frêgit frontem,
              Trâxit sêcum Gâiam însontem.[3]

    [Footnote 3: Here, as well as elsewhere, remember that _Gâius_ and
    _Gâia_ are each three syllables.]

_Mag._ Hôc satis est hodiê. Nunc, puerî, cor-- Quid tibi vîs, Quînte
Hortênsî? Facis ut tôtô corpore contremîscam.

_Q. Hor._ (who has been shaking his hand persistently). Magister,
ego novôs versûs prônûntiâre possum. Soror mea eôs mê docuit.

_Mag._ Recitâ celeriter.

_Q. Hor._     Iacôbulus Horner
              Sedêbat in corner
              Edêns Sâturnâlicium pie;
              Înseruit thumb,
              Extrâxit plum,
              Clâmâns, Quam âcer puer sum I.

_Mag._ Nunc, puerî, corpora exercête. Ûnum, duo, tria.

  (The _discipuli_ now perform gymnastic exercises, following the
  example of the _magister_, who goes through the movements with
  them. These may be made very amusing, especially if the following
  movements are used: Arms sideways--stretch; heels--raise, knee bend;
  forehead--firm; right knee upward--bend.)

_Mag._ Cônsîdite. Pênsum crâstinum est pênsum decimum. Cavête nê hôc
oblîvîscâminî. Pênsum crâstinum est pênsum decimum. Et porrô hunc versum
discite: "Superanda omnis fortûna ferendô est." (The _magister_ repeats
this verse emphatically several times in a loud and formal tone, the
_discipuli_ repeating it after him at the top of their voices.) Iam
geôgraphia nôbîs cônsîderanda est et Galliae opera danda. Quid dê Galliâ
potes tû dîcere, Mârce Mârcelle?

_M. Mar._ Gallia est omnis dîvîsa in partês três, quârum ûnam incolunt
Belgae, aliam Aquîtânî, tertiam quî ipsôrum linguâ Celtae, nostrâ Gallî
appellantur.

_Mag._ Pûblî Pulcher, hôrum omnium, quî fortissimî sunt?

_P. Pul._ Hôrum omnium fortissimî sunt Belgae.

_Mag._ Mihi dîc cûr Belgae fortissimî sint.

_P. Pul._ Belgae fortissimî sunt proptereâ quod â cultû atque hûmânitâte
Rômae longissimê absunt, minimêque ad eôs mercâtôrês Rômânî saepe
commeant atque ea quae ad effêminandôs animôs pertinent, important.

_Mag._ Quis fînês Galliae dêsîgnâre potest?

_All_ (raising hands). Ego, ego possum.

_Mag._ Lûcî Lûculle, Galliae fînês dêsîgnâ.

_L. Luc._ Gallia initium capit â flûmine Rhodanô; continêtur Garumnâ
flûmine, Ôceanô, fînibus Belgârum; attingit flûmen Rhênum ab Sêquanîs et
Helvêtiîs; vergit ad septentriônês.

_Mag._ Quôs deôs colunt Gallî, Gnaeî Pompêî?

_Gn. Pom._ Deôrum maximê Mercurium colunt; hunc omnium inventôrem artium
ferunt, hunc viârum atque itinerum ducem esse arbitrantur. Post hunc
Apollinem et Martem et Iovem et Minervam colunt.

_Mag._ Bene, Gnaeî. Quem deum, Catilîna, colunt Rômânî maximê?

_L. Cat._ Nôs Iovem dîvum patrem atque hominum rêgem maximê colimus.

_Mag._ Nunc, puerî, cantâte. Quod carmen hodiê cantêmus? (Many hands are
raised.) Gâî Caesar, quod carmen tû cantâre vîs?

_G. Caes._ Volô "Mîlitês Chrîstiânî" cantâre.

_Mag._ Hôc pulcherrimum carmen cantêmus. (A knock is heard. Enter
Publius Licinius Crassus and Aulus Licinius Archias with slaves carrying
scrolls.) Salvête, amîcî. Vôs advênisse gaudeô. Nônne adsîdêtis ut
puerôs cantâre audiâtis?

_A. Archias._ Iam rêctê, carmen sânê audiâmus.

_Mag._ Optimê, puerî, cantêmus. Ûnum, duo, tria.

  (All rise and sing; each has the song[4] before him on a scroll.)

    [Footnote 4: Tune of "Onward, Christian Soldiers." Slightly
    altered from _Education_, Vol. IX, p. 187. The author hopes that
    this most obvious anachronism will be pardoned on the ground that
    this hymn appeals to young pupils more than most Latin songs,
    and is therefore enjoyed by them and more easily learned.]

    Mîlitês Chrîstiânî,
    Bellô pergite;
    Câram Iêsû crucem
    Vôs prôvehite.
    Chrîstus rêx, magister,
    Dûcit âgmina,
    Eius iam vêxillum
    It in proelia.

    Mâgnum âgmen movet
    Deî ecclêsia.
    Gradimur sânctôrum,
    Frâtrês, sêmitâ.
    Nôn dîvîsî sumus,
    Ûnus omnês nôs;
    Ûnus spê, doctrînâ,
    Câritâte nôs.

    Thronî atque rêgna
    Înstâbilia,
    Sed per Iêsum cônstâns
    Stat ecclêsia.
    Portae nôn gehennae
    Illam vincere,
    Nec prômissus Iêsû
    Potest fallere.

    Popule, beâtîs
    Vôs coniungite!
    Carmina triumphî
    Ûnâ canite;
    Chrîstô rêgî honor,
    Laudês, glôria,
    Angelî hôc canent
    Saecla omnia.

_Mag._ Iam, puerî, silentiô factô, Gâius Iûlius Caesar nôbîs suam
ôrâtiônem habêbit quam dê ambitiône suâ composuit. Hâc ôrâtiône fînîtâ,
Mârcus Tullius Cicerô suam habêbit. Ut prônûntiâtum est complûribus
diêbus ante, hî duo puerî dê praemiô inter sê contendunt. Hôc diê
fêlîcissimô duo clârissimî et honestissimî virî arbitrî sunt, Aulus
Licinius Archiâs et Pûblius Licinius Crassus. In rôstra, Gâî Iûlî
Caesar, êscende!

_G. Caes._ (Reads from a scroll or recites.) Mea câra ambitiô est
perîtus dux mîlitum fierî. Bella multa et mâgna cum gentibus omnibus
nâtiônibusque orbis terrae gerere cupiô.

Bellum înferre volô Germânîs et însulae Britanniae omnibusque populîs
Galliae et cêterîs quî inimîcô animô in populum Rômânum sunt. In prîmîs,
in însulam Britanniam pervenîre cupiô, quae omnis ferê Rômânîs est
incôgnita, et côgnoscere quanta sit mâgnitûdô însulae.

Volô pontem in Rhênô aedificâre et mâgnum exercitum trâdûcere ut metum
illîs Germânîs quibus nostra parvula corpora contemptuî sunt iniciam.
Ubi Rhênum ego trânsierô, nôn diûtius glôriâbuntur illî Germânî
mâgnitûdine suôrum corporum.

Vôs sententiam rogô, iûdicês amplissimî, nônne est haec ambitiô honesta?

Deinde rês gestâs meâs perscrîbam. Negôtium hûius historiae legendae
puerîs dabô mentium exercendârum causâ, nam mihi crêdite, commentâriî dê
bellô Gallicô ûtilês erunt ad ingenia acuenda puerôrum. (_Discipuli_
applaud.)

_Mag._ Nunc Mârcus nôbîs dê suâ cârissimâ ambitiône loquêtur. In rôstra
êscende, Mârce!

_M. Cic._ Quoad longissimê potest mêns mea respicere et ultimam memoriam
recordârî, haec mea ambitiô fuit, ut mê ad scrîbendî studium cônferam,
prîmum Rômae, deinde in aliîs urbibus.

Ambitiô mea autem est omnibus antecellere ingenî meî glôriâ, ut haec
ôrâtiô et facultâs, quantacumque in mê sit, numquam amîcôrum perîculîs
dêsit. Nônne est haec ambitiô maximum incitâmentum labôrum?

Deinde, haec est mea ambitiô, ut cônsul sim. Dê meô amôre glôriae vôbîs
cônfitêbor. Volô poêtâs reperîre quî ad glôriam meî cônsulâtûs
celebrandam omne ingenium cônferant. Nihil mê mûtum poterit dêlectâre,
nihil tacitum. Quid enim, nônne dêsîderant omnês glôriam et fâmam? Quam
multôs scrîptôrês rêrum suâram mâgnus ille Alexander sêcum habuisse
dîcitur! Itaque, ea verba quae prô meâ cônsuêtûdine breviter
simpliciterque dîxî, arbitrî, cônfîdô probâta esse omnibus. (_Discipuli_
applaud.)

_Mag._ Ut vidêtis, arbitrî clârissimî, puerî ânxiîs animîs vestrum
dêcrêtum exspectant. Quae cum ita sint, petô â vôbîs, ut testimônium
laudis dêtis.

_A. Archias._ Ambôs puerôs, magister, maximê laudamus, sed ûnus sôlus
praemium habêre potest. Nôs nôn dêcernere possumus. Itaque dêcrêvimus ut
hî puerî ambô inter sê sortiantur uter praemium obtineat. Servî, urnam
prôferte! Nômina in urnam iaciam. Quî habet nômen quod prîmum êdûcam, is
vîctor erit. (Takes from the urn a small chip and reads the name _Marcus
Tullius Cicero_.) Tê, Mârce Cicerô, victôrem esse prônûntiô. Sîc fâta
dêcrêvêrunt. Servî, corônam ferte! (Places a wreath of leaves on the
head of Marcus. The _discipuli_ again applaud.)

_M. Cic._ (going up to Cæsar). Caesar, nôlî animô frangî. Nôn dubium est
quîn tû meliôrem ôrâtiônem habuerîs.

_G. Caes._ (coolly). Dîs aliter vîsum est.

_Mag._ Vôs ambô, Gâî et Mârce, honôrî huic scholae estis. Utinam cêterî
vôs imitentur. Aliud certâmen hûius modî mox habêbimus. Loquêmur dê--
(A knock is heard. Enter Gaius Licinius Crassus.)

_G. Cras._ Mî pater!

_P. Cras._ Mî fîlî! (They embrace.)

_G. Cras._ Mâter mea mihi dîxit tê arbitrum in hôc certâmine hodiê esse.
Tê diûtius exspectâre nôn potuî. Iam diû tê vidêre cupiô et ego quoque
cupiô hôc certâmen audîre. Estne cônfectum?

_P. Cras._ Cônfectum est. Utinam hî puerî tê recitâre audiant! Tû eôs
docêre possîs quômodo discipulî Rhodiî in scholâ recitent.

_M. Cic._ Ô arbiter, nôbîs grâtissimum sit, sî tuum fîlium audîre
possîmus.

_Discipuli_ (eagerly). Ô Crasse, recitâ, recitâ!

_G. Cras._ Sî vôbîs id placet, recitâbô, meum tamen carmen longum est.
Êius titulus est "Pome of a Possum." (Recites with gesticulation.)

    The nox was lit by lûx of lûna,
    And 'twas a nox most opportûna
    To catch a possum or a coona;
    For nix was scattered o'er this mundus,
    A shallow nix, et nôn profundus.
    On sîc a nox, with canis ûnus,
    Two boys went out to hunt for coonus.
        Ûnus canis, duo puer,
        Numquam braver, numquam truer,
        Quam hoc trio quisquam fuit,
        If there was, I never knew it.
    The corpus of this bonus canis
    Was full as long as octô span is,
    But brevior legs had canis never
    Quam had hîc bonus dog et clever.
    Some used to say, in stultum iocum,
    Quod a field was too small locum
    For sîc a dog to make a turnus
    Circum self from stem to sternus.
    This bonus dog had one bad habit,
    Amâbat much to chase a rabbit;
    Amâbat plûs to catch a rattus,
    Amâbat bene tree a cattus.
      But on this nixy moonlight night
    This old canis did just right,
    Numquam chased a starving rattus,
    Numquam treed a wretched cattus,
    But cucurrit on, intentus
    On the track and on the scentus,
    Till he treed a possum strongum
    In a hollow trunkum longum.
    Loud he barked in horrid bellum,
    Seemed on terrâ vênit hellum.
    Quickly ran uterque puer
    Mors of possum to secure.
    Cum venêrunt, one began
    To chop away like quisque man;
    Soon the ax went through the trunkum,
    Soon he hit it all kerchunkum;
    Combat deepens; on, ye braves!
    Canis, puerî, et staves;
    As his powers nôn longius tarry,
    Possum potest nôn pûgnâre;
    On the nix his corpus lieth,
    Ad the Styx his spirit flieth,
    Joyful puerî, canis bonus
    Think him dead as any stonus.
    Now they seek their pater's domô,
    Feeling proud as any homô,
    Knowing, certê, they will blossom
    Into heroes, when with possum
    They arrive, narrâbunt story,
    Plênus blood et plênior glory.
    Pompey, David, Samson, Caesar,
    Cyrus, Black Hawk, Shalmaneser!
    Tell me where est now the glôria,
    Where the honors of vîctôria?

      Cum ad domum nârrant story,
    Plênus sanguine, tragic, gory,
    Pater praiseth, likewise mâter,
    Wonders greatly younger frâter.
    Possum leave they on the mundus,
    Go themselves to sleep profundus,
    Somniant possums slain in battle
    Strong as ursae, large as cattle.

      When nox gives way to lûx of morning,
    Albam terram much adorning,
    Up they jump to see the varmen
    Of which this here is the carmen.
    Possum, lo, est resurrêctum!
    Ecce puerum dêiectum!
    Nôn relinquit track behind him,
    Et the puerî never find him;
    Cruel possum, bêstia vilest,
    How tû puerôs beguilest;
    Puerî think nôn plûs of Cæsar,
    Go ad Orcum, Shalmaneser,
    Take your laurels, cum the honor,
    Since istud possum is a goner![5]

    [Footnote 5: Anonymous.]

  (_Discipuli_ applaud.)

_Mag._ Omnês quî Gâiô Crassô grâtiâs agere velint, surgite! (All stand.)
Nunc, puerî, domum redîte.

_Discipuli_ (departing).

      Omne bene,
      Sine poenâ
    Tempus est lûdendî;
      Vênit hôra
      Absque morâ
    Librôs dêpônendî.

Valê, magister. Valê, magister.




COSTUMES


The _magister_, _iudices_, and _discipuli_ should all wear white togas
with a purple[6] border. A white gauze shirt with short sleeves may be
used as a tunic, while white duck trousers and tennis slippers serve to
complete the costume.

[Illustration]

The togas can be made of white muslin according to the measurements and
cut given by Professor Johnston,[7] which he has kindly permitted me to
use. "Those who attempt the reconstruction of the toga wholly or chiefly
from works of art find it impossible to reproduce on the living form the
drapery seen on the statues, with a toga of one piece of goods or of a
semicircular pattern. An experimental form is shown in the figure, and
resembles that of a lamp shade cut in two and stretched out to its full
extent. The dotted line _GC_ is the straight edge of the goods; the
heavy lines show the shape of the toga after it had been cut out, and
had had sewed upon it the ellipse-like piece marked _FRAcba_. The
dotted line _GE_ is of a length equivalent to the height of a man
at the shoulder, and the other measurements are to be calculated
proportionately. When the toga is placed on the figure, the point _E_
must be on the left shoulder, with the point _G_ touching the ground in
front. The point _F_ comes at the back of the neck, and as the larger
part of the garment is allowed to fall behind the figure the points _L_
and _M_ will fall on the calves of the legs behind, the point _a_ under
the right elbow, and the point _b_ on the stomach. The material is
carried behind the back and under the right arm and then thrown over the
left shoulder again. The point _c_ will fall on _E_, and the portion
_OPCa_ will hang down the back to the ground. The part _FRA_ is then
pulled over the right shoulder to cover the right side of the chest and
form the _sinus_, and the part running from the left shoulder to the
ground in front is pulled up out of the way of the feet, worked under
the diagonal folds, and allowed to fall out a little to the front."

The _servi_ and _paedagogus_ should wear tunics of some coarse,
dark-colored material.

In small schools, where there is not a sufficiently large number of boys
in the Latin classes for _discipuli_, the parts may be taken by girls.
Their hair should fall nearly to their shoulders, as in the case of the
Roman boy. They may wear unstarched white skirts under the toga.

The _tabellae_ may be made of little book-shaped slates with wooden
borders (paint them light-colored), and the rolls of paper.

    [Footnote 6: That is, either "the color of clotted blood" (which
    was the Tyrian purple, the purple above all others) or any color
    from this to violet; "purple" meant the dye from any sort of
    univalve mollusk that gave a dye. There is reason to believe that
    genuine Turkey red, though not a mollusk dye, was commercially
    called a purple.]

    [Footnote 7: Johnston, "Private Life of the Romans," Scott,
    Foresman & Co., 1903.]




A ROMAN WEDDING

63 B.C.




  TRES SCAENAE

  Scaena prîma:   Spônsâlia
  Scaena secunda: Nûptiae
  Scaena tertia:  Dêductiô


  DRÂMATIS PERSÔNÆ

  Spônsa:         Tullia
  Spônsus:        Gâius Pîsô
  Spônsae pater:  Mârcus Tullius Cicerô
  Spônsae mâter:  Terentia
  Spônsî pater:   Lûcius Pîso Frûgî
  Spônsî mâter
  Spônsae frâter: Mârcus Tullius Cicerô, adulêscêns
  Flâmen Diâlis
  Pontifex Maximus
  Iûris cônsultus
  Quîntus Hortênsius
  Prônuba
  Sîgnâtôrês
  Tîbîcinês
  Lîctôrês

  Mârcipor   }
  Philotîmus } Servî
  Tîrô       }
  Anna       }




A ROMAN WEDDING


SCAENA PRÎMA

SPÔNSÂLIA

  Let the curtain be raised, showing a room furnished as nearly as
  possible like the atrium of a Roman house. A bench, covered with
  tapestry, on each side of the stage facilitates the seating of the
  guests. Cicero is heard practicing an oration behind the scenes.

_M. Cic._ Ô rem pûblicam miserâbilem! Quâ rê, Quirîtês, dubitâtis? Ô dî
immortâlês! Ubinam gentium sumus? In quâ urbe vîvimus? Quam rem pûblicam
habêmus? Vîvis, et vîvis nôn ad dêpônendam sed ad cônfîrmandam tuam
audâciam.

  (Enter Terentia. A slave, Anna, follows bringing a boy's toga,
  which she begins to sew, under Terentia's direction. Another slave,
  Marcipor, also follows.)

Nihil agis, nihil môlîris, nihil côgitâs quod nôn ego nôn modo audiam,
sed videam. Quae cum ita sint, Catilîna, ex urbe êgredere; patent
portae, proficîscere. Mâgnô mê metû lîberâbis dum modo inter mê atque tê
mûrus intersit. Quid est enim, Catilîna, quod tê iam in hâc urbe
dêlectâre possit? Quamquam quid loquor? Tê ut ûlla rês frangat?
(A crash, similar to that of falling china, is heard.)

_Terentia._ Quid est? Vidê, Mârcipor!

  (As Marcipor is about to leave, Philotimus enters at the right,
  bringing in his hands the pieces of a broken vase.)

_Phil._ Ô domina, ecce, dominus, dum ôrâtiônem meditâtur, vâs quod ipse
tibi ê Graeciâ attulit, manûs gestû dêmôlîtus est.

_Terentia_ (groaning). Lege, Philotîme, omnia fragmenta. (Exit Phil.)
Mihi, Mârcipor, fer cistam ex alabastrîtâ factam. (Exit Mar.)
(To herself.) Tam molestum est ôrâtôrî nûpsisse. (Covers her face with
her hands, as if weeping.)

_M. Cic._ (proceeding with his practicing). Atque hôc quoque â mê ûnô
togâtô factum est. Mârce Tullî, quid agis? Interfectum esse Lûcium
Catilînam iam prîdem oportêbat. Quid enim malî aut sceleris fingî aut
côgitârî potest quod ille nôn concêperit? Ô rem pûblicam fortûnâtam,
ô praeclâram laudem meî cônsulâtûs, sî ex vîtâ ille exierit! Vix feram
sermônês hominum, sî id fêcerit. (Enter Marcipor with a small box.)

_Mar._ Hîc est, domina, cista tua.

_Terentia_ (takes from her bosom a key and opens the box, taking out a
package of letters, one of which she reads). "Sine tê, ô mea Terentia
cârissima, sum miserrimus. Utinam domî têcum semper manêrem. Quod cum
nôn possit, ad mê cotîdiê litterâs scrîbe. Cûrâ ut valeâs et ita tibi
persuâdê, mihi tê cârius nihil esse nec umquam fuisse. Valê, mea
Terentia, quam ego vidêre videor itaque dêbilitor lacrimîs. Cûrâ, cûrâ
tê, mea Terentia. Etiam atque etiam valê."

Quondam litterâs amantissimâs scrîpsit; nunc epistolia frîgêscunt.
Quondam vâs mihi dedit, nunc vâs mihi dêmôlîtur; quondam fuit marîtus,
nunc est ôrâtor. Tam molestum est mâtrem familiâs esse.

  (Enter Cicero, from the right, followed by his slave Tiro, carrying
  a number of scrolls which he places upon a table.)

_M. Cic._ Quid est, Terentia? Quidnam lacrimâs? Mihi dîc.

_Terentia._ Rês nûllast! Modo putâbam quantum mûtâtus ab illô Cicerône
quî mê in mâtrimônium dûxerit, sit Cicerô quem hodiê videô. Tum
Terentiae aliqua ratiô habêbâtur. Nunc vacat Cicerô librîs modo et
ôrâtiônibus et Catilînae. Nescîs quantum mê hûius negôtî taedeat! Nûllum
tempus habês ad cônsultandum mêcum dê studiîs nostrî fîliolî. Magister
dê eô haec hodiê rettulit. (Hands Cicero a scroll.) Mê pudet fîlî.

_M. Cic._ (reading to himself the report). Dîc meô fîliô, Mârcipor,
ut ad mê veniat. (Exit Marcipor, who returns bringing young Marcus.)

_M. Cic. a._ Quid est, pater?

_M. Cic._ Tua mâter, mî fîlî, animum ânxium ob hanc renûntiâtiônem dê tê
habet. Mê quoque, cônsulem Rômânum, hûius renûntiâtiônis quibusdam
partibus pudet. (Reads aloud.) "Bis absêns." Cûr, mî fîlî, â scholâ
âfuistî?

_M. Cic. a._ Id nôn memoriâ teneô.

_Terentia._ Sunt multa quae memoriâ nôn tenês, sî ego dê hâc
renûntiâtiône iûdicâre possum.

_M. Cic._ (continues reading). "Tardus deciêns!" Deciêns! Id est
incrêdibile! Fîlius cônsulis Rômânî tardus deciêns! Mâter tua id nôn
patî dêbuit.

_Terentia_ (angrily). Mâter tua id nôn patî dêbuit! Immô vêrô pater tuus
id nôn patî debuit.

_M. Cic._ "Ars legendî _A_." Id quidem satis est. "Ars scrîbendî _D_."
_D_! Id quidem minimê satis est. Nûgâtor dêfuit officiô! "Fîlius tuus
dîcit scrîptûram tempus longius cônsûmere. Dêbet sê in scrîbendô multum
exercêre, sî scrîbere modô tolerâbilî discere vult. Arithmêtica _A_.
Huic studiô operam dat. Dêclâmâtiô _A_. Omnibus facile hôc studiô
antecellit." Bene, mî fîlî. Ea pars hûius renûntiâtiônis mihi mâgnopere
placet. Ôrâtor clârissimus ôlim eris.

_Terentia._ Ûnus ôrâtor apud nôs satis est.

_M. Cic. a._ Ôrâtor erô ôlim nihilô minus. Facile est ôrâtôrem fierî.
Dêclâmâtiô est facillima. Hodiê in scholâ hanc dêclâmâtiônem didicî:

    Omnia tempus edâx dêpâscitur, omnia carpit,
      Omnia sêde movet, nîl sinit esse diû.
    Flûmina dêficiunt, profugum mare lîtora siccant,
      Subsîdunt montês et iuga celsa ruunt.
    Quid tam parva loquor? môlês pulcherrima caelî
      Ardêbit flammîs tôta repente suîs.
    Omnia mors poscit. Lêx est, nôn poena, perîre:
      Hîc aliquô mundus tempore nûllus erit.

_Terentia._ Tâlis dêclâmâtiô est facilis. Audî quid dê geômetriâ tuâ
relâtum sit. Geômetria magis quam declâmâtiô ostendit utrum tû mentem
exerceâs.

_M. Cic._ (continues reading). "Geômetria _D_." Magister haec scripsit:
"Fîlius tuus dîcit geômetriam ôrâtôribus inûtilem esse. Eî dîligenter
domî labôrandum est." Ô Mârce, hôc est incrêdibile! Num dîxistî tû
geômetriam ôrâtôribus inûtilem esse?

_M. Cic. a._ Ô, studium geômetriae mihi odiôsum ingrâtumque est! Omnês
puerôs istîus taedet. Tantî nôn est!

_M. Cic._ Etiam sî studium tû nôn amâs, geômetriam discere dêbês. Tibi
centum sêstertiôs dabô sî summam notam in geômetriâ proximô mênse
adeptus eris.

_M. Cic. a._ (grasping his father's hand). Amô tê, pater, convenit!
Eam adipîscar!

_Terentia_ (to Anna). Estne toga parâta?

_Anna._ Parâta est, domina.

_Terentia._ Hûc venî, Mârce!

_M. Cic. a._ Ô mâter, tempus perdere nôlô. Mâlô legere.

_Terentia._ Quid dîcis? Nôn vîs? Nônne vîs novam togam habêre?

_M. Cic. a._ Nôlô. Novâ mî nîl opus est. Tam fessus sum! (Picks up a
scroll and is about to take a seat in the corner.)

_M. Cic._ Ad mâtrem tuam, Mârce Cicerô, sine morâ, accêde!

  (Marcus is about to obey when a knock is heard at the door.
  Lucius Piso Frugi and Quintus Hortensius enter at the left.)

_M. Cic._ (greeting Q. Hortensius). Ô amîcî, salvête! ut valêtis?

_Terentia_ (greeting L. Piso). Dî duint vôbîs quaecumque optêtis.
Cicerônî modo dîcêbam nôs diû vôs nôn vidêre, praesertim tê, Pîsô.
Mârcipor, ubi est Tullia? Eî dîc ut hûc veniat.

_L. Piso._ Nôlî Tulliam vocâre. Nunc cum parentibus Tulliae agere volô,
nôn cum Tulliâ ipsâ.

_Terentia._ Nôn vîs nostram Tulliam vidêre! Quid, scîre volô?

_L. Piso._ Cum eâ hôc tempore agere nôn cupiô. Id propter quod in
vestram domum hodiê vênî tuâ, et Cicerônis rêfert. Velim vôbîscum agere
prô meô fîliô, Gâiô Pîsône, quî fîliam tuam in mâtrimônium dûcere vult.

_M. Cic._ Meam fîliam in mâtrimônium dûcere! Mea Tulliola nôndum satis
mâtûra est ut nûbat. Mea fîlia mihi cârior vîtâ ipsâ est. Eam âmittere
. . . id nôn ferre possum. Ea lûx nostra est. Meâ Tulliolâ nihil umquam
amâbilius, nec longâ vîtâ ac prope immortâlitâte dîgnius vîdî. Nôndum
annôs quattuordecim implêvit et iam êius prûdentia est mîrâbilis. Ut
magistrôs amat! Quam intellegenter legit! Nôn possum verbîs exprimere
quantô vulnere animô percutiar sî meam Tulliolam âmittam. Utinam penitus
intellegerês meôs sênsûs, quanta vîs paternî sit amôris.

_L. Piso._ Tâlia verba, Mârce Tullî, virî Rômânî nôn propria sunt.
Necesse est omnês nostrâs fîliâs in mâtrimônium dêmus. Nihil aliud
exspectâ.

_Terentia._ Nostra fîlia omnibus grâtissima est. Semper enim lepida et
lîberâlis est. Iam diû sciô nôs eam nôn semper retinêre posse.

_L. Piso._ Rêctê, rêctê! Meus fîlius bonus est; est ôrâtor. Est quoque
satis dîves. Rômae duâs aedês habet; rûre mâgnificentissima vîlla est
eî. Cum illô fîlia tua fêlîx erit. Id mihi persuâsum habeô. Quae cum ita
sint, Mârce Tullî, sine dôte tuam fîliam meô fîliô poscô.

_M. Cic._ Prohibeant dî immortâlês condiciônem êius modî. Cum mea fîlia
in mâtrimônium danda sit, nêminem côgnôvî quî illâ dîgnior sit quam tuus
fîlius êgregius.

_L. Piso_ (shaking hands with Cicero). Ô Mârce, mî amîce, dî tê
respiciant! Nunc mihi eundum est ut fîlium et sîgnâtôrês arcessam et iam
hûc revertar.

  (Exeunt L. Piso and Q. Hortensius.)

_Terentia._ Dîc, Mârcipor, servîs ut in culînâ vînum, frûctûs, placentâs
parent. (Exit Marcipor.) Mârce, fîlî, sorôrem vocâ.

_M. Cic. a._  Tullia, ô Tullia,
              Soror mea bella,
              Amâtôres tibi sunt
              Pîsô et Dolâbella.

  (Enter Tullia at the right.)

              Amatne Pîsô tê,
              Etiam Dolâbella?
              Tullia, ô Tullia,
              Soror mea bella,
              Pîsônem tuum marîtum fac;
              Nôn grâtus Dolâbella.

_Tullia._ Ô Mârce, tuî mê taedet. Quid est, mâter?

_Terentia._ Tullia, nônne est Gâius Pîsô tibi grâtissimus?

_Tullia._ Ô, mihi satis placet. Cûr mê rogâs, mâter?

_Terentia._ Rogô, mea fîlia, quod Pîsô tê in mâtrimônium dûcere vult.
Tibi placetne hôc?

_Tullia._ Mihi placet sî--

_Terentia._ Sî--quid, mea fîlia?

_Tullia._ Ô mâter, nôlô nûbere. Sum fêlîx têcum et patre et Mârcô. Vîxî
tantum quattuordecim annôs. Puella diûtius esse volô, nôn mâter
familiâs.

_Terentia._ Pîsô dîves est. Pater tuus nôn mâgnâs dîvitiâs nunc habet.
Meum argentum quoque cônsûmptum est. Etiam haec domus nostra nôn diûtius
erit. Quid faciâmus sî tû nôn bene nûbês?

_Tullia._ Sciô patrem meum nôn mâgnâs possessiônês habêre; quid vêrô,
mâter? Servîlia, Lûcullî spônsa, quî modo rediit spoliîs Orientis
onustus, semper suam fortûnam queritur. Misera Lûcullum ôdit ac
dêtestâtur. Hesternô diê meîs auribus Servîliam haec verba dîcere
audîvî: "Mê miseram! Înfêlîcissimam vîtam! Fêminam maestam! quid faciam?
Mihi dêlêctus est marîtus ôdiôsus. Nêmô rogâvit quî vir mihi maximê
placeat. Coniugem novum ôderô, id certum est. Prae lacrimîs nôn iam
loquî possum." Ô mâter! ego sum aequê trîstis ac Servîlia. Nôlô Gâiô
Pîsônî nûbere. Nûllî hominî, neque Rômânô neque peregrînô, quem vîderim,
nûbere volô.

_Terentia._ Tullia, mea fîlia, mâtris et nostrae domûs miserêre! Hodiê
pater â mê argentum postulâbat quod eî dare nôn poteram. Pîsô dîtissimus
est et nôbîs auxiliô esse potest. Parentum tuôrum causâ tê ôrô nê hunc
êgregium adulêscentem aspernêris.

_Tullia._ Ô Servîliam et Tulliam, ambâs miserâs! Quid dîcis tû, mî
pater? Vîs tû quoque mê in mâtrimônium dare?

_M. Cic._ Ô mea Tulliola, mê nôlî rogâre. Nescîs quantum ego tê amem.
Sine tê vîvere nôn poterô. Id mihi persuâsum habeô. Putô tamen, sî pâcem
apud nôs habêre velîmus, tê mâtris iussa sequî necesse esse.

_Tullia._ Volô, mî pater, tê pâcem habêre. Tua vîta tam perturbâta fuit.
Nûbam, sed ô mê miseram!

  (A knock is heard. Enter from the left L. Piso, Gaius Piso, and the
  _signatores_. They are greeted by Cicero and Terentia and seated
  by slaves.)

_Terentia_ (as she receives them). Multum salvête, ô amîcî. Tulliae vix
persuâdêre poteram, tamen nôn iam invîta est.

_L. Piso._ Bene, bene, hîc est mihi diês grâtissimus. Parâta sunt omnia?

_Terentia._ Omnia parâta sunt, sed iûris cônsultus nôndum vênit.

_L. Piso._ Ille quidem ad tempus adesse pollicitus est.

_Terentia._ Id spêrô. Tîbîcinês, Mârcipor, hûc arcesse. (Enter Q.
Hortensius and his wife, together with the pronuba and the _iuris
consultus_.) Salvête, meî amîcî. Adsîdite sî placet.

_Iuris con._ Sî mihi veniam dabitis, nôn diû morârî velim. Înstâns
negôtium mê in forô flâgitat. Mihi mâtûrandum est. (Goes to a table with
M. Cicero and busies himself with the _tabulae nuptiales_.)

_L. Piso._ Mâtûrêmus! Gâî et Tullia, ad mê venîte! (To Cicero.)
Spondêsne Tulliam, tuam fîliam, meô fîliô uxôrem darî?

_M. Cic._ Dî bene vertant! Spondeô.

_L. Piso._ Dî bene vertant!

_G. Piso_ (placing a ring on the fourth finger of Tullia's left hand).
Hunc ânulum quî meum longum amôrem testêtur aceipe. Manum, Tullia, tibi
dô, et vim bracchiôrum et celeritâtem pedum et glôriam meôrum patrum.
Tê amô, pulchra puella. Tê ûnam semper amâbô. Mihi es tû cârior omnibus
quae in terrâ caelôque sunt. Fêlîcês semper sîmus!

_Iuris con._ Tabulae nûptiâlês sunt parâtae et ecce condiciônês.
(Reads.) "Hôc diê, prîdiê Îdûs Aprîlês, annô sescentêsimô nônâgêsimô
prîmô post Rômam conditam, M. Tulliô Cicerône Gâiô Antôniô cônsulibus,
ego M. Tullius Cicerô meam fîliam Tulliam Gâiô Calpurniô Lûcî fîliô
Pîsônî spondeô. Eam cum dôte dare spondeô. Ea dôs erit quîndecim mîlia
sêstertium." (Turning to Gaius.) Gâî Pîsô, spondêsne tê Tulliam semper
amâtûrum cultûrumque?

_Gr. Piso._ Id spondeô.

_Iuris con._ Spondêsne tû, Tullia, tê Gâiô Pîsônî semper obsecutûram
esse?

_Tullia._ Id spondeô.

_Iuris con._ (stamping the _tabulae_ with a seal). Nuc subscrîbite!
Tû prîmus, Cicerô, deinde Terentia et Tullia et Gâius.

  (The _tibicines_ play softly and the _servi_ pass wine, dried fruit,
  and small cakes. Tullia, taking her glass of wine, steps forward
  and pours a little out as an offering to the gods. After the
  witnesses have signed in turn, the following words of
  congratulation are spoken.)

_Q. Hor._ Beâtî vîvâtis, Pîsô et Tullia! Omnês spônsô et spônsae salûtem
propînêmus! (All drink to the health of the betrothed.)

_M. Cic. a._ Sint dî semper volentês propitiîque ipsîs domuî
familiaeque. Sit vôbîs fortûna benîgna!

_M. Cic._ Tibi grâtulor, Pîsô. Tû pulcherrimam et optimam puellam tôtîus
Rômae adeptus es.

_Pronuba._ Ô fortûnâte adulêscêns quî tâlem puellam invênerîs!

_Iuris con._ Sîgnâvêruntne omnês? Tû, Quînte Hortênsî, nôndum
subscrîpsistî.

_Q. Hor._ Id statim faciam. (Signs.)

_Pronuba._ Nunc omnês cantêmus!

  (All join in singing, accompanied by the _tibicines_.)

  [Music:
  Hespere, qui caelo fertur crudelior ignis?
  Qui natam possis complexu avellere matris,
  Complexu matris retinentem avellere natam
  Et iuveni ardenti castam donare puellam.
  Quid faciunt hostes capta crudelius urbe?
  Hymen O Hymenæe, Hymen ades O Hymenæe.]


SECUNDA SCAENA

NÛPTIAE

  The house is adorned with wool, flowers, tapestry, and boughs.

  The Pontifex Maximus (wearing a white fillet) and the Flamen Dialis
  enter from opposite sides, each preceded by a lictor with fasces,
  who remains standing at the side of the stage, while the priests
  pass on to the altar. The Flamen burns incense. A slave brings in a
  pigeon on a silver tray and hands it to the Flamen, while another
  hands to the Pontifex from a basket a plate of meal and one with
  crackers.

  The priests, taking respectively the bird and the meal, hold them
  high above their heads and look up devoutly, after which the bridal
  party enters, from the left, in the following order:

  The bride, preceded by the pronuba, comes first. Both take their
  places, standing at the right of the altar; next the groom, preceded
  by the boys, takes his stand near the bride, a little to the left;
  the guests follow and are seated.

  Cicero hands wine to the priests, with which they sprinkle the
  sacrifices.

  As the Flamen again looks up and raises his hands above his head,
  all kneel except the priests and lictors, while he pronounces the
  following solemn words:

Auspicia secunda sunt. Mâgna grâtia dîs immortâlibus habenda est.
Auspicia secunda sunt.

  After all have risen, the pronuba, placing her hands upon the
  shoulder of the bride and groom, conducts them to the front of the
  altar. There she joins their hands and they walk around the altar
  twice, hand in hand, stopping in front when the ceremony proper
  begins.

  Again the Flamen says:

Auspicia secunda sunt.

  The Pontifex hands the groom a cracker, of which he partakes,
  passing it on to the bride. The pronuba puts back the veil, and
  after the bride has eaten the cracker she says to the groom:

Ubi tû Gâius, ego Gâia.

  Both are then conducted by the pronuba to two chairs, placed side by
  side, at the right of the altar, covered with the skin of a sheep.
  They face the altar and the pronuba covers their heads with a large
  veil. (Place the same veil over both.)

_Pontifex Maximus_ (making an offering of meal to Jupiter).

    Iuppiter omnipotêns dîvum pater atque hominum rêx,
    Hôs spônsôs bene respiciâs, faveâsque per annôs.
    Iuppiter omnipotêns, precibus sî flecteris ûllîs
    Aspice eôs, hôc tantum, et sî pietâte merentur,
    Dâ cursum vîtae iûcundum et commoda sparge
    Multa manû plênâ; vîrês validâsque per mensês
    Hî habeant, puerôs pulchrôs fortêsque nepôtês.
    Rêbus iûcundîs quibus adsîs Iuppiter semper.

_Flamen Dialis._

    Iûnô quae incêdis dîvum rêgîna Iovisque
    Coniunx et soror, hôs spônsôs servâ atque tuêre.
    Sint et fêlîcês, fortês, pietâte suprêmî;
    Mâgnâ cum virtûte incêdant omnibus annîs,
    Semper fortûnâtî, semper et usque beâtî.

  (The pronuba now uncovers the heads of the wedded pair and they
  receive congratulations.)

_L. Piso._ Beâtî vîvâtis, Gâî et Tullia!

_Terentia._ Vôbîs sint dî semper faustî!

_M. Cic. a._ Vôbîs ambôbus grâtulor. Sed nûlla rês levis est
mâtrimônium. Quid, Tullia?

_Tullia._ Rêctê dîcis, frâter, mâtrimônium nôn in levî habendum est.

_M. Cic._ Sint omnês diês fêlîcês aequê ac hîc diês.

_Pronuba._ Spêrô, meî amîcî, omnês diês vôbîs laetissimôs futûrôs esse.

  (The curtain falls. The priests and lictors retire, all the rest,
  except Terentia and Tullia, keeping the same position for the next
  scene.)


SCAENA TERTIA

DÊDUCTIÔ

  The guests are sitting about the room. The bride is sitting on her
  mother's lap. Her wedding ornaments have been taken off and she is
  closely veiled. The groom takes her as if by force from her mother's
  arms.

_Tullia._ Ô mâter, mâter, nôlô â tê et patre meô discêdere. Ô, mê
miseram!

_Terentia._ Î, fîlia, î! Saepe tuôs parentês et frâtrem vîsere poteris.
Necesse est nunc cum marîtô eâs.

_G. Piso._ Mihi, Tullia, cârior vîtâ es. Tê nôn pigêbit coniugem meam
fierî. Id polliceor. Mêcum venî, Tullia cârissima!

_Tullia._ Sîc estô. Prius mustâceum edendum est. (She cuts the wedding
cake and all partake.)

_L. Pisonis uxor._ Hôc mustâceum optimum est. Hôc fêcistîne tû, Tullia?

_Tullia._ Nihil temporis habêbam quô mustâceum facerem. Multa mihi ûnô
tempore agenda erant.

_Terentia._ Tullia mustâceum facere potest sî spatium datur.

_M. Cic. a._ (taking another piece of cake). Tullia est dêliciae
puellae. Sî ûnum modo mustâceum habêmus, ad novam domum Tulliae
proficîscâmur.

(Others cry out) Eâmus!

  The curtain falls. A frame to represent the door of a Roman house is
  placed to the left of the stage; a small altar stands at the right:
  a circular piece of wood with holes bored in it as a receptacle for
  the torches (common wax candles) is placed on top of the altar used
  by the priests. The procession to the groom's house advances from
  the left in the following order:

  The flute-players first, followed by a lad carrying a torch and
  vase; next the bride, supported on either side by a boy; the groom,
  throwing nuts to those in the street, walks at the side; a boy
  follows, carrying the bride's spindle; the others follow, two by
  two, all carrying torches and singing:

    Hespere, quî caelô fertur crûdêlior îgnis?
    Quî nâtam possîs complexû âvellere mâtris,
    Complexû mâtris retinentem âvellere nâtam
    Et iuvenî ârdentî castam dônâre puellam.
    Quid faciunt hostês captâ crûdêlius urbe?
    Hýmên ô Hymenaee, Hýmên ades ô Hymenaee.

  When the groom's house is reached, the bride winds the door posts
  with woolen bands and anoints them with oil to signify health and
  plenty. She is then lifted over the threshold by two boys to prevent
  possible stumbling. The groom, Cicero, Terentia, L. Piso and his
  wife, enter the house and place their torches on the altar; the
  others remain standing outside. All continue singing, accompanied by
  the flute-players, until after the groom hands to the bride a dish,
  on which incense is burning, and a bowl of water, which both touch
  in token of mutual purity, and Tullia again repeats the words:

Ubi tû Gâius, ego Gâia.

_G. Piso_ (presenting to her the keys, which she fastens in her girdle).
Sit fêlîx nostra vîta! Clâvês meae domûs, mea uxor, accipe!

  Tullia kindles the fire on the altar with her torch, and then throws
  it to a girl outside. The girl who catches the torch exclaims:

Ô, mê fêlicissimam! proxima Tulliae nûbam.

  (Tullia kneels at the altar and offers prayer to Juno.)

    Iûnô, es auctor mûnerum,
    Iûnô, mâter omnium,
    Nôbîs dâ nunc gaudium.
    Iûnô, adiûtrîx es hominum,
    Iûnô, summa caelitum,
    Nôbis sîs auxilium.




  [Illustration: ROMAN MARRIAGE]

COSTUMES AND SUGGESTIONS


The bride wears a white dress trimmed with purple fringe, a girdle of
crimson wool, and a long yellow veil. She has on many bright-colored
ribbons, many bracelets and rings, and high yellow shoes with buckles.
Her hair is arranged in six locks parted by the point of a spear and
held in place by _vittae_ or bands.

The Pontifex should have a band of purple three inches wide around the
bottom of his toga.

The boys should wear straight robes reaching to the knee and gathered at
the shoulders. The garb of the statue "Diana of the Hind" is a good
illustration.

The slaves wear bright-colored tunics reaching to the knees.

Valuable suggestions may be found in Johnston's "Private Life of the
Romans," "Harper's Dictionary of Classical Antiquities," and _Harper's
Magazine_, Vol. 46.

The individual parts should be thoroughly learned and practiced before a
full rehearsal is attempted.

Especial emphasis should be placed upon the necessity of reciting the
parts slowly and distinctly.

The signing of the _tabulae nuptiales_ was a part of the _nuptiae_, but
it has been introduced during the _sponsalia_ to give better balance to
the play. Wherever permissible, very simple Latin has been used in order
to render the task of memorizing as easy as possible.


SCENE I

SPONSALIA--BETROTHAL

Cicero's house. Terentia complains that Cicero neglects her and that he
devotes too much time to the prosecution of Catiline and to study. The
school report (renuntiatio) of her son, the young Cicero, also causes
her anxiety. Marcus junior adds to her anxiety by affirming that he
wishes to become an orator like his father. He promises, however, that
he will study his geometry more diligently and thereby gain the reward
offered by Cicero. Lucius Piso calls at Cicero's home to ask the hand of
Tullia for his son Gaius Piso. Terentia is pleased with the prospect of
marrying her daughter so well. Tullia herself and Cicero prefer to wait
until Tullia is older. Tullia says she can sympathize with Servilia and
others who have no girlhood on account of marrying so young; but finally
she yields to her mother's wish and consents to become betrothed to
Gaius. The witnesses arrive and the betrothal (sponsalia) takes place.
The marriage contract (tabulae nuptiales) is signed, showing the amount
of dowry. Refreshments are partaken of, following a libation in honor of
the gods. Congratulations are offered and the wedding hymn is sung.


SCENE II

NUPTIAE--WEDDING CEREMONY

The auspices are taken and pronounced favorable. The groom and bride
assume the names of Gaius and Gaia, respectively. These particular names
were chosen, according to some, out of respect to the noted spinner
Gaius and his royal wife, who were held by the Romans as a pattern of
conjugal fidelity and skilled industry; according to others, because of
the derivation from _gaudere_. Tullia with the words "Ubi tu Gaius, ego
Gaia" (where you are Gaius, I am Gaia) signifies her willingness to
enter the gens of her husband. The eating of the cake presented by the
Pontifex (confarreatio) is the most important part of the ceremony,
suggesting the sacramental view of marriage. The skin upon which the
bride and groom are seated is supposed to be that of the sheep
sacrificed before the ceremony begins. Prayer is offered to Jupiter by
the Pontifex, and to Juno by the Flamen Dialis, after which
congratulations are offered.


SCENE III

DEDUCTIO--PROCESSION TO THE GROOM'S HOUSE

The bride is taken, to all appearances, by force from her mother's
embrace,--a survival of the marriage by capture, or, as the Romans
themselves put it, a reminiscence of the Sabine marriage. The
_mustaceum_, or wedding cake, is eaten, and the procession begins,
all singing the wedding hymn. The groom throws nuts to the boys in the
street as a sign that he will now put away childish things. Arriving at
the groom's house, the bride anoints the doorposts with oil to signify
health and plenty, and then offers a prayer for future happiness.


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *


Errata

Variation between "æ" and "ae" is unchanged, including the spelling of
"Drâmatis Persônæ" or "-ae". Note that the name is consistently "Cæsar"
in English, "Caesar" in Latin.

  ... the writer's aim will be / accomplished
    [_lack of closing punctuation may be intentional_]

  _Gn. Pom._ Iôannês, Iôannês, tîbîcine nâtus  [Iôannês, Ioannês]
  Portae nôn gehennae  [non]
  When nox gives way to lûx of morning  [lux]

  Lege, Philotîme, omnia fragmenta.  [frâgmenta]
  Tê nôn pigêbit coniugem  [non]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Two Latin Plays for High-School
Students, by Susan Paxson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWO LATIN PLAYS ***

***** This file should be named 31894-8.txt or 31894-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/8/9/31894/

Produced by Louise Hope, David Starner, Chuck Greif and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
